# Characterization of Immunological Responses to Borrelia Immunogenic Protein A (BipA), a Species-Specific Antigen for North American Tick-Borne Relapsing Fever

**Authors:** Curtis MW;Krishnavajhala A;Kneubehl AR;Embers ME;Gettings JR;Yabsley MJ;Lopez JE;  
**Date:** 06/29/2022  
**Journal:** Microbiology spectrum  
**DOI:** 10.1128/spectrum.01722-21  
**PMID:** 35579456  
**URL:** https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35579456/

---

## Content

Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF) is a neglected vector-borne bacterial disease distributed worldwide. Borrelia turicatae, Borrelia parkeri, and Borrelia hermsii are three argasid-borne TBRF species previously implicated in human disease in North America. TBRF is likely underdiagnosed due to its nonspecific symptoms and poorly developed diagnostic tests. Studies suggest that theBorreliaimmunogenic protein A (BipA) is specific to TBRFBorreliabut heterogenic between species. In this study, we hypothesized that antibody responses generated to BipA are specific to the North American TBRF species infecting a given animal. To test this, we characterized the expression and localization of native BipA in North American species of TBRFBorrelia. We also infected mice by needle inoculation or tick bite withB. turicatae,B. hermsii, orB. parkeriand evaluated serum sample reactivity to recombinant BipA (rBipA) that was produced from each species. Furthermore, serum samples from nonhuman primates and domestic dogs experimentally infected withB. turicataewere assessed. Lastly, we tested human Lyme disease (LD) serum samples to determine potential cross-reactivity to rBipA generated fromB. turicatae,B. parkeri, and B. hermsii. Our findings indicate that rBipA has the potential to distinguish between infections of LD- and TBRF-causing spirochetes and that antibody responses were more robust toward theBorreliaspecies causing infection. This work further supports that rBipA can likely distinguish betweenB. turicatae, B. hermsii, andB. parkeriinfections in mice, canines, and nonhuman primates.IMPORTANCEBorreliaspecies transmitted by soft or hard ticks cause tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF). This is a debilitating disease distributed worldwide but is likely underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed as Lyme disease due to poorly developed diagnostic tests. Borrelia turicatae, Borrelia parkeri, and Borrelia hermsii are three TBRF species previously implicated in human disease in North America. Commonly used diagnostic methods do not identify the species causing infection. In this study, we evaluated the potential of recombinantBorreliaimmunogenic protein A (rBipA) as a diagnostic antigen capable of distinguishing between infections of TBRFBorreliaspecies. We show that serum from mice, canines, and nonhuman primates infected withB. turicatae,B. parkeri, or B. hermsii react more strongly to the rBipA from the species causing infection. Furthermore, sera from Lyme disease patients failed to cross-react with our rBipA proteins, indicating the potential to use rBipA as a species-specific diagnostic antigen for TBRF.
